[Music]
Hey ever dozed off before your PC at
work only to wake up mere seconds later
[Music]
tedious job will do that for you
and now imagine that you've been driving
for ten hours non-stop and that you
didn't really have a good night's sleep
before that either yeah what do you
think me happen while you're at the
wheel that's right micro sleep can be
dangerous now micro sleep sounds as if
it's just an extra short nap that you
take when your body says I'm done with
this but what really happens is that
you're both asleep and awake at the same
time you can sit in front of your
computer or at a meeting and stare at
some random point on the wall opposite
you without even being aware of it that
is until you wake yourself up or someone
does this favor for you I'd like to give
you an example of this condition based
on my own life because believe me
I've suffered enough from micro steps to
last me a lifetime
you see I'm a freelancer so I don't work
set hours like 9 to 5 or 10 to 6 some
might say it's awesome I can choose when
to work and sleep away until 3:00 p.m.
but in fact it's quite different
my pay fully depends on how much I work
so my schedule is pretty irregular and I
might get less than four hours of
shut-eye at night then again I've got a
family and I need to spend quality time
with them too as well as have my own
meet I of course naturally of all things
I choose to sacrifice sleep in favour of
my family my job and myself now in case
you're wondering why I'm telling you all
this in such detail it has to do with
micro sleep it originally started as a
nuisance I would sit in my laptop late
at night writing something for work
after an 18-hour shift and then I just
spaced out
[Music]
it didn't take longer than a few seconds
but I felt my chin falling onto my chest
and I had a really hard time opening my
eyes and focusing on the screen I knew I
had to go to bed after that but more
often than not I'd pour another cup of
coffee instead and continue working
after several months of such a schedule
I started noticing something was
alarmingly off episodes of dozing off
became more frequent I would fall into
this weird state every five minutes or
so but the creepiest thing was that I
would find words and even full sentences
I didn't remember typing in my documents
and those were strange things that I
wrote they didn't even fit the overall
context that was when I decided to do
something about my life otherwise as I
suspected I would soon ruin both my
career and my health and naturally first
of all I did some research on the topic
it turned out this is a rather common
issue with lots of people like I said a
bit earlier it's a state when you're
asleep but not quite the thing is
certain parts of your brain simply shut
down during micro state while others
keep on going like nothing happened this
leads you to become pretty much a zombie
for a few seconds
[Music]
your brain is not fully operational you
don't really control yourself and you
can't wake yourself up by force of will
either because you don't even realize
you fallen asleep all you do is
basically stare blankly in front of you
and then wake up with a jolt and no
memories of what just happened sounds
like some kind of a sci-fi flick but at
least you don't awaken any uncanny
abilities while micro sleeping anyway I
digress
I thought micro sleep was linked with a
lack of healthy night's rest but it
seems well rested people can also
experience it so no one's really safe in
dr. Govinda Podell and his colleagues
from the Monash University in Australia
conducted an experiment in which 20
healthy and rested people were given a
50-minute task to complete the catch was
in the task itself it was an awfully
boring activity where the participants
had to track an object on the screen the
researchers meanwhile did a tracking of
their own they monitored the subjects
eye and brain activity as a result they
found that over 70% of the subjects
frequently fell into micro sleep it
turned out that the tedium of the
tracking task was so intense that people
simply couldn't stop their thoughts from
wandering so despite all of the
participants having a good night's sleep
before the experiment almost
three-quarters of them experienced micro
sleep okay that makes this state not the
one associated with tiredness doesn't it
well it's not that simple mental
exhaustion is actually a huge factor
anyway in as early as 1994 NASA
conducted a study that proved pilots who
had 40 minute naps performed much better
in the last 90 minutes of their flight
than those who didn't have the luck
their performance was evaluated by
different parameters one of which was
the number of microsleep episodes and it
appeared that the pilots who had napped
during the day only had thirty four
episodes mid-flight
well the non Nappers had a whopping 120
can you even imagine how dangerous it is
for a pilot to zone out during a flight
that's exactly why it's mandatory for
all civil aviation pilots to have an
eight-hour sleep before their next
flight so what happens to you when you
have a micro sleep episode in 2015 dr.
Julian on from the Duke and u.s.
graduate Medical School Singapore tried
to explain its mechanism the
participants of dr. Ahn's experiment
first had to endure 22 hours without
sleep then they were laid into a dark
fMRI machine where F stands for
functional and their brain activity was
monitored now picture yourself in their
shoes you have been deprived of sleep
for almost a full day and then you get
to lie down in some dark place which
feels cozier with every passing minute
naturally very soon all subjects started
zoning out and that's when the
researchers noticed unusual patterns you
see during normal sleep the thalamus
which regulates the sleep/wake cycle
stops sending signals to the brain
becoming much less active the same thing
happens during micro sleep so here's a
similarity already but the main
difference between the two is that
during micro sleep areas of the brain
responsible for alertness suddenly lit
up if it were normal sleep they wouldn't
so much as spark but in this case they
simply burst the researchers concluded
that the case was solved micro sleep was
declared a state in which your brain
really wants you to fall asleep but at
the same time it doesn't feel safe
enough to turn you off
that's why it activates the regions that
would spike your attention levels and
let you go on for some more time
ideally it should give you time to find
a place to lie down and get some Z's in
reality however everything's different
just like I said you spaced out and
don't control your body which may just
stay still or continue doing the tasks
you set before it prior to your
microscope sesh and this is perhaps the
most dangerous thing of all many people
don't notice their episodes because
they've never stopped doing what they
were doing and they don't even realize
they've just zoned out of reality now
let's get back to the example I gave you
at the very beginning you're on a
highway and you're driving fast
you know there's your sharp turn a mile
down the road and you get ready to slow
down but then something happens and
you're already rolling in an overturned
car you don't even remember what caused
the accident
that's how microsleep works and it's
insidious in fact you can go on doing
things on autopilot but you can't make
any decisions such as making a sharp
turn so your life is really at stake
here and yet another thing that bothers
me in microsleep is that left unchecked
it could lead to some serious stuff like
it was with me I basically started
daydreaming or in other words
hallucinating if you're too tired too
often you're bound to start seeing
things and that's never a good sign
so what can you do to get rid of
microsleep in fact nothing much you
can't get rid of it completely but you
sure can reduce the time spent in this
state and it's simple to the point of
ridiculous get quality sleep every night
and if you can't allow that to yourself
at least take several 20-minute naps
during the day or one big one and a half
hour nap in the middle of the day trust
me
this became my choice and I started
feeling much better after an almost
sleepless night so it works
ah I think I'm going to get my second
nap now well before I go do you remember
your own episodes of micro sleep let me
know down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend but
hey don't go zoning out just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life